# Maven Builder Generator Plugin (Version 2.1)
This is a simple maven plugin that generates builder classes for classes that have the appropriate annotation. The builders are generated during the generate-sources phase of the maven build. The current version is restricted to the use of default settings. Customization is currently in a proof of concept state.

The generator creates the builders as a fully functional skeleton. It can be used "as is" without manual changes. On the other hand is it possible to change and extend the generated builder. Methods can be added and implementation can be changed. When the generator runs a second time, missing methods will be created existing methods will not be changeed. When the builder class was deleted or renamed a new one will be created.

The generator can also generate accessor methods for the fields in the class of the objects that are generated by the builder. 

## Nomenclature
There is no standard for the naming of builder components.   
The following terms are used throughout the code and the documentation.

The (generated) class that builds the object instances is the **builder**.
The object it builds is the **product**.
The class which defines the product is the **product class**.
A method of the builder that sets the value of a product field is a **mutator**.
A mutator that adds something (e.g. an Object to a Collection) is an **adder**.
The method in the builder that provides the **product** is the **build method**.
A method of the product class that returns the content of a field is an **accessor**.

I avoided the terms **getter** and **setter** because of the special meaning they have in the JavaBeans context.

## Principles
1. The generator reads and generates source.
The generation of a builder is only possible if the source code for the product class is available.
The result is java source, no byte code manipulation is done.
2. Generated code should always be changable
The generator produces methods with default implementations. The implementation may ge changed, the generator
should never change the implementation after generation. Deleted methods will be generated again.
3. The generated code performs no null checks. This is important when dealing with collections.
A collection object should never contain a null value.

## Usage
Add the following to the plugin section of your pom.xml
```
<plugin>
    <groupId>io.github.mletkin</groupId>
    <artifactId>builder-generator-maven-plugin</artifactId>
    <version>1.0.0</version>
    <executions>
        <execution>
            <goals>
                <goal>generate</goal>
            </goals>
        </execution>
    </executions>
</plugin>
```
Add the annotation `@GenerateBuilder`to each class for which you want to create a builder.
Builder code is generated in the `generate-sources` phase of the maven build. 

## Configuration
The following settings may be customized through Maven configuration
### builder creation
To use the generated builder it is necessary to create builder instances. The generator provides two alternatives.
The builder creates the object of the product class during builder creation. For this reason the builder generator must provide a constructor or factory method for each product constrcutor.  
#### Constructor
For each constructor in the production class a constructor in the builder class is created.
```
<configuration>
    <builderCreation>CONSTRUCTOR</builderCreation>
<configuration>
```
#### Factory
For each constructor in the production class a static factory method the builder class is created.
This is the default.
```
<configuration>
    <builderCreation>FACTORY</builderCreation>
<configuration>
```
### builder location
The builder can be generated as separate class or as member class of the product class.
#### embedded
The builder class is generated as member class (sometimes called "static inner class") of the product class.
This is the default.
```
<configuration>
    <builderLocation>EMBEDDED</builderLocation>
<configuration>
```
#### separate
The builder class is generated as a separate class. It is located logically in the same package as the product class an physically in the same directory in the file system.   
```
<configuration>
    <builderLocation>SEPARATE</builderLocation>
<configuration>
```
### compileSourceRoots
A list property with the directories that contain the production classes. The directories will be searched recursively.
The default is ```${project.compileSourceRoots}```
### targetDirectory
The directory in which the generated builder classes are stored. File paths are created for the packages. The parameter is only relevant if the builders are created as separate classes.
The default is the generation in the same directory as the product class.
### products are mutable by default
If set to true product classes are considered mutable. For the modification of product class instances a constructor (or factory method) will be created in the builder class. This modificaton method accepts a product class instance as parameter.
The default value is **false**. This means that the product objetcs are considered immutable and no method for modification is generated.
```
<configuration>
    <productsAreMutable>true</productsAreMutable>
<configuration>
```
## mutator and adder generation for lists and sets
Lists and sets are special. You may want to fill a list with one statement (e.g. from a stream or with a list if values).
Or maybe you want to add values without clearinging the list collected to far. The generator generates two sets of methods:
Plain mutator methods drop the current list and replace it with another list. Adder methods retain the list content and add
values to the list. You my specify a list of mutator/adder vatiants in the plugin configuration. The possible values are
collected in the enum ```GenerateAdder.Variants```. The following values are available:
- *NONE*, ignored, might be used to define an emptry list
- *OBJECT*, create a method that replaces the list object with the given list object, not valid for adder use
- *VARARG*, create a method that takes the values as vararg parameter list
- *ITEM*, create a method with a single value, obly valid for adder use
- *STREAM*, create a method that takes a stream of values as parameter
- *COLLECTION* , creates a method that takes a collection of values as parameter

The difference between *OBJECT* an *COLLECTION*  is that *COLLCTION* copies the values into the list (or a new list)
while *OBJECT* uses the reference of the List or Set object. 

None of the generated methods checks the arguments for ```null``` values and none of the adder methods checks
that the list or set field contains an object. You should initialize the list in the product class. A list object
should never ever contain ```null```.

### mutator configuration
Mutator variants are defined like this:
```
<listMutatorVariants>
    <listMutatorVariant>STREAM</listMutatorVariant>
    <listMutatorVariant>VARARG</listMutatorVariant>
    <listMutatorVariant>COLLECTION</listMutatorVariant>
</listMutatorVariants>
```
### adder configuration
Adder variants are defined like this:
```
<listAdderVariants>
    <listAdderVariant>STREAM</listAdderVariant>
    <listAdderVariant>VARARG</listAdderVariant>
</listAdderVariants>
```

## Annotations
Most of the behavior of the builder generator is controlled through annotations.
The generator will stick to the annotation concept. The names might change and options may be set via annotation parameters. 
All annotations are located in the package ```io.github.mletkin.numerobis.annotation```
### GenerateBuilder
Used on product classes.
This is the most important annotation. Only classes annotated with ```@GenerateBuilder``` will be processed.
### GenerateAccessors
Used on product classes.
For every field in the product class an accessor will be generated. Accessors have the same name as the field.
### GenerateMutator
Mutator generation is the default. This annotation is a means to specify a custom name for the mutator.
### Ignore
Used on product fields.
Field annotated with ```@Ignore``` are ignored by the generator, no mutators are generated.
### Mutable and Immutable
Used on product classes.
Overrides the default setting for "product classes are immutable/mutable by default".


